# DevOps Applied to Everything

This project originated from a request to discuss the application of DevOps at
Cray. Part of my role involved addressing the question: What should DevOps look like at Cray, particularly for the teams I supported? This inquiry naturally
expanded into a broader consideration: What should DevOps look like for any
given project? As a multipotentialite, I was further intrigued by the
possibility that the principles of DevOps could be applied beyond their
traditional domains.

This project aims to examine the fundamental principles underlying DevOps and
related methodologies, identifying the key factors that contribute to both
success and failure. Additionally, it seeks to explore how these principles can
be extended to other disciplines, fostering opportunities for cross-disciplinary
learning. Through discussions with industry leaders and practitioners, the
project endeavors to uncover insights and best practices that can drive
continuous improvement. By analyzing both parallel and contrasting methodologies
across diverse fields, the ultimate goal is to develop a more comprehensive,
interdisciplinary understanding of productive cultures and effective practices.

The extent to which the concept of "everything" can be encompassed within DevOps
remains an open question.

Historically, groundbreaking ideas have led to significant successes, many of
which have been adapted to contemporary challenges, occasionally yielding
transformative outcomes. It is possible that continuous improvement processes,
along with their iterative refinements, could be applied recursively to
themselves, further enhancing their efficacy.

What insights can DevOps offer beyond manufacturing and high technology?
Moreover, if an analogous framework emerges in an entirely different context,
can engineering-oriented fields derive valuable lessons from it?

Many of the concepts explored in this project are not novel, yet they may
require reconsideration from a different perspective. From everything to
everythingâ€”how do we optimize processes, and what ultimately defines success?

This project involves extensive research, critical analysis, and in-depth
discussions with professionals, alongside practical and experimental
applications designed to test and refine these ideas.

DC - 2024???? - 20250327

---

[Preliminary Brain Dump](brain-dump.md)  
[A practical example to apply to many things](practical-example.md)  

---

Draft: Human Systems and Value Delivery

